README.markdown, before:

<img src="marketing/maglev-header.png" alt="OneBusAway Maglev" width="600">

# OBA Maglev

A complete rewrite of the OneBusAway (OBA) REST API server in Golang.

## Getting Started

### Option 1: Native Go Installation

1. Install Go 1.24.2 or later.
2. Copy `config.example.json` to `config.json` and fill in the required values.
3. Run `make run` to build and start the server.
4. Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:4000/api/where/current-time.json?key=test` to verify the server works.

### Option 2: Docker (Recommended)

Docker provides a consistent development environment across all platforms.

**Quick Start:**

```bash
# Build and run with Docker Compose (recommended)
# Uses config.docker.json which stores data in /app/data/ for persistence
docker-compose up

# Or build and run manually
docker build -t maglev .
docker run -p 4000:4000 -v $(pwd)/config.docker.json:/app/config.json:ro -v maglev-data:/app/data maglev
```

**Verify it works:**

```bash
curl http://localhost:4000/api/where/current-time.json?key=test
```

**Development with live reload:**

```bash
docker-compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up
```

See the [Docker](#docker) section below for more details.

## Configuration

Maglev supports two ways to configure the server: command-line flags or a JSON configuration file.

### Command-line Flags (Default)

Run the server with command-line flags:

```bash
./bin/maglev -port 8080 -env production -api-keys "key1,key2" -rate-limit 50
```

### JSON Configuration File

Alternatively, use a JSON configuration file with the `-f` flag:

```bash
./bin/maglev -f config.json
```

An example configuration file is provided as `config.example.json`. You can copy and modify it:

```bash
cp config.example.json config.json
# Edit config.json with your settings
./bin/maglev -f config.json
```

Example `config.json`:

```json
{
  "port": 8080,
  "env": "production",
  "api-keys": ["key1", "key2", "key3"],
  "rate-limit": 50,
  "gtfs-static-feed": {
    "url": "https://example.com/gtfs.zip",
    "auth-header-name": "Authorization",
    "auth-header-value": "Bearer token456"
  },
  "gtfs-rt-feeds": [
    {
      "trip-updates-url": "https://api.example.com/trip-updates.pb",
      "vehicle-positions-url": "https://api.example.com/vehicle-positions.pb",
      "service-alerts-url": "https://api.example.com/service-alerts.pb",
      "realtime-auth-header-name": "Authorization",
      "realtime-auth-header-value": "Bearer token123"
    }
  ],
  "data-path": "/data/gtfs.db"
}
```

**Note:** The `-f` flag is mutually exclusive with other command-line flags. If you use `-f`, all other configuration flags will be ignored. The system will error if you try to use both.

**Dump Current Configuration:**

```bash
./bin/maglev --dump-config > my-config.json
# or with other flags
./bin/maglev -port 8080 -env production --dump-config > config.json
```

**JSON Schema & IDE Integration:**

A JSON schema file is provided at `config.schema.json` for IDE autocomplete and validation.

To enable IDE validation, add `$schema` to your config file:

```json
{
  "$schema": "./config.schema.json",
  "port": 4000,
  "env": "development",
  ...
}
```

### Configuration Options

| Option             | Type    | Default         | Description                                                       |
| ------------------ | ------- | --------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `port`             | integer | 4000            | API server port                                                   |
| `env`              | string  | "development"   | Environment (development, test, production)                       |
| `api-keys`         | array   | ["test"]        | API keys for authentication                                       |
| `rate-limit`       | integer | 100             | Requests per second per API key                                   |
| `gtfs-static-feed` | object  | (Sound Transit) | Static GTFS feed configuration with URL and optional auth headers |
| `gtfs-rt-feeds`    | array   | (Sound Transit) | GTFS-RT feed configurations                                       |
| `data-path`        | string  | "./gtfs.db"     | Path to SQLite database                                           |

## Basic Commands

All basic commands are managed by our Makefile:

`make run` - Build and run the app with a fake API key: `test`.

`make build` - Build the app.

`make clean` - Delete all build and coverage artifacts.

`make coverage` - Test and generate HTML coverage artifacts.

`make test` - Run tests.

`make models` - Generate Go code from SQL queries using sqlc.

`make watch` - Build and run the app with Air for live reloading during development (automatically rebuilds and restarts on code changes).

## Directory Structure

- `bin` contains compiled application binaries, ready for deployment to a production server.
- `cmd/api` contains application-specific code for Maglev. This will include the code for running the server, reading and writing HTTP requests, and managing authentication.
- `internal` contains various ancillary packages used by our API. It will contain the code for interacting with our database, doing data validation, sending emails and so on. Basically, any code which isn’t application-specific and can potentially be reused will live in here. Our Go code under cmd/api will import the packages in the internal directory (but never the other way around).
- `migrations` contains the SQL migration files for our database.
- `remote` contains the configuration files and setup scripts for our production server.
- `go.mod` declares our project dependencies, versions and module path.
- `Makefile` contains recipes for automating common administrative tasks — like auditing our Go code, building binaries, and executing database migrations.

## Debugging

```bash
# Install Delve
go install github.com/go-delve/delve/cmd/dlv@latest

# Build the app
make build

# Start the debugger
dlv --listen=:2345 --headless=true --api-version=2 --accept-multiclient exec ./bin/maglev
```

And then you'll be able to debug in the GoLand IDE.

## SQL

We use sqlc with SQLite to generate a data access layer for our app.
Use the command `make models` to regenerate all autogenerated files.

### Important files

- `gtfsdb/models.go` Autogenerated by sqlc
- `gtfsdb/query.sql` All of our SQL queries
- `gtfsdb/query.sql.go` All of our SQL queries turned into Go code by sqlc
- `gtfsdb/schema.sql` Our database schema
- `gtfsdb/sqlc.yml` Configuration file for sqlc

## Docker

Docker support provides a consistent development environment and simplified deployment.

### Prerequisites

- Docker 20.10 or later
- Docker Compose v2.0 or later

### Building the Image

```bash
# Build the production image
docker build -t maglev .

# Or use make
make docker-build
```

### Running with Docker

**Using Docker directly:**

```bash
# Run the container (mount your config file)
docker run -p 4000:4000 -v $(pwd)/config.json:/app/config.json:ro maglev

# Or use make
make docker-run
```

**Using Docker Compose (recommended for production):**

```bash
# Start the service
docker-compose up -d

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f

# Stop the service
docker-compose down
```

### Development with Docker

For development with live reload:

```bash
# Start development environment with Air live reload
docker-compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up

# Or use make
make docker-compose-dev
```

The development setup includes:

- Live reload on code changes (via Air)
- Delve debugger port exposed on 2345
- Source code mounted for immediate updates

### Docker Make Targets

| Command                    | Description                   |
| -------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `make docker-build`        | Build the Docker image        |
| `make docker-run`          | Build and run the container   |
| `make docker-stop`         | Stop and remove the container |
| `make docker-compose-up`   | Start with Docker Compose     |
| `make docker-compose-down` | Stop Docker Compose services  |
| `make docker-compose-dev`  | Start development environment |
| `make docker-clean`        | Remove all Docker artifacts   |

### Data Persistence

The SQLite database is persisted using Docker volumes:

- **Production**: `maglev-data` volume mounted at `/app/data`
- **Development**: `maglev-dev-data` volume

To inspect the database:

```bash
docker-compose exec maglev cat /app/data/gtfs.db
```

### Health Checks

The container includes a health check that verifies the API is responding:

```bash
# Check container health status
docker inspect --format='{{.State.Health.Status}}' maglev
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description                | Default |
| -------- | -------------------------- | ------- |
| `TZ`     | Timezone for the container | `UTC`   |

### Troubleshooting

**Container fails to start:**

```bash
# Check logs
docker-compose logs maglev

# Verify config file exists
ls -la config.json
```

**Health check failing:**

```bash
# Test the endpoint manually
curl http://localhost:4000/api/where/current-time.json?key=test
```

**Permission issues:**

```bash
# The container runs as non-root user (maglev:1000)
# Ensure mounted volumes are accessible
```

Commit message:

api key warning, health check key warning

README.markdown, after:

<img src="marketing/maglev-header.png" alt="OneBusAway Maglev" width="600">

# OBA Maglev

A complete rewrite of the OneBusAway (OBA) REST API server in Golang.

## Getting Started

### Option 1: Native Go Installation

1. Install Go 1.24.2 or later.
2. Copy `config.example.json` to `config.json` and fill in the required values.
3. Run `make run` to build and start the server.
4. Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:4000/api/where/current-time.json?key=test` to verify the server works.

### Option 2: Docker (Recommended)

Docker provides a consistent development environment across all platforms.

**Quick Start:**

```bash
# Build and run with Docker Compose (recommended)
# Uses config.docker.json which stores data in /app/data/ for persistence
docker-compose up

# Or build and run manually
docker build -t maglev .
docker run -p 4000:4000 -v $(pwd)/config.docker.json:/app/config.json:ro -v maglev-data:/app/data maglev
```

**Verify it works:**

```bash
curl http://localhost:4000/api/where/current-time.json?key=test
```

**Development with live reload:**

```bash
docker-compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up
```

See the [Docker](#docker) section below for more details.

## Configuration

Maglev supports two ways to configure the server: command-line flags or a JSON configuration file.

### Command-line Flags (Default)

Run the server with command-line flags:

```bash
./bin/maglev -port 8080 -env production -api-keys "key1,key2" -rate-limit 50
```

### JSON Configuration File

Alternatively, use a JSON configuration file with the `-f` flag:

```bash
./bin/maglev -f config.json
```

An example configuration file is provided as `config.example.json`. You can copy and modify it:

```bash
cp config.example.json config.json
# Edit config.json with your settings
./bin/maglev -f config.json
```

Example `config.json`:

```json
{
  "port": 8080,
  "env": "production",
  "api-keys": ["key1", "key2", "key3"],
  "rate-limit": 50,
  "gtfs-static-feed": {
    "url": "https://example.com/gtfs.zip",
    "auth-header-name": "Authorization",
    "auth-header-value": "Bearer token456"
  },
  "gtfs-rt-feeds": [
    {
      "trip-updates-url": "https://api.example.com/trip-updates.pb",
      "vehicle-positions-url": "https://api.example.com/vehicle-positions.pb",
      "service-alerts-url": "https://api.example.com/service-alerts.pb",
      "realtime-auth-header-name": "Authorization",
      "realtime-auth-header-value": "Bearer token123"
    }
  ],
  "data-path": "/data/gtfs.db"
}
```

**Note:** The `-f` flag is mutually exclusive with other command-line flags. If you use `-f`, all other configuration flags will be ignored. The system will error if you try to use both.

**Dump Current Configuration:**

```bash
./bin/maglev --dump-config > my-config.json
# or with other flags
./bin/maglev -port 8080 -env production --dump-config > config.json
```

**JSON Schema & IDE Integration:**

A JSON schema file is provided at `config.schema.json` for IDE autocomplete and validation.

To enable IDE validation, add `$schema` to your config file:

```json
{
  "$schema": "./config.schema.json",
  "port": 4000,
  "env": "development",
  ...
}
```

### Configuration Options

| Option             | Type    | Default         | Description                                                       |
| ------------------ | ------- | --------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `port`             | integer | 4000            | API server port                                                   |
| `env`              | string  | "development"   | Environment (development, test, production)                       |
| `api-keys`         | array   | ["test"]        | API keys for authentication                                       |
| `rate-limit`       | integer | 100             | Requests per second per API key                                   |
| `gtfs-static-feed` | object  | (Sound Transit) | Static GTFS feed configuration with URL and optional auth headers |
| `gtfs-rt-feeds`    | array   | (Sound Transit) | GTFS-RT feed configurations                                       |
| `data-path`        | string  | "./gtfs.db"     | Path to SQLite database                                           |

## Basic Commands

All basic commands are managed by our Makefile:

`make run` - Build and run the app with a fake API key: `test`.

`make build` - Build the app.

`make clean` - Delete all build and coverage artifacts.

`make coverage` - Test and generate HTML coverage artifacts.

`make test` - Run tests.

`make models` - Generate Go code from SQL queries using sqlc.

`make watch` - Build and run the app with Air for live reloading during development (automatically rebuilds and restarts on code changes).

## Directory Structure

- `bin` contains compiled application binaries, ready for deployment to a production server.
- `cmd/api` contains application-specific code for Maglev. This will include the code for running the server, reading and writing HTTP requests, and managing authentication.
- `internal` contains various ancillary packages used by our API. It will contain the code for interacting with our database, doing data validation, sending emails and so on. Basically, any code which isn’t application-specific and can potentially be reused will live in here. Our Go code under cmd/api will import the packages in the internal directory (but never the other way around).
- `migrations` contains the SQL migration files for our database.
- `remote` contains the configuration files and setup scripts for our production server.
- `go.mod` declares our project dependencies, versions and module path.
- `Makefile` contains recipes for automating common administrative tasks — like auditing our Go code, building binaries, and executing database migrations.

## Debugging

```bash
# Install Delve
go install github.com/go-delve/delve/cmd/dlv@latest

# Build the app
make build

# Start the debugger
dlv --listen=:2345 --headless=true --api-version=2 --accept-multiclient exec ./bin/maglev
```

And then you'll be able to debug in the GoLand IDE.

## SQL

We use sqlc with SQLite to generate a data access layer for our app.
Use the command `make models` to regenerate all autogenerated files.

### Important files

- `gtfsdb/models.go` Autogenerated by sqlc
- `gtfsdb/query.sql` All of our SQL queries
- `gtfsdb/query.sql.go` All of our SQL queries turned into Go code by sqlc
- `gtfsdb/schema.sql` Our database schema
- `gtfsdb/sqlc.yml` Configuration file for sqlc

## Docker

Docker support provides a consistent development environment and simplified deployment.

### Prerequisites

- Docker 20.10 or later
- Docker Compose v2.0 or later

### Building the Image

```bash
# Build the production image
docker build -t maglev .

# Or use make
make docker-build
```

### Running with Docker

**Using Docker directly:**

```bash
# Run the container (mount your config file)
docker run -p 4000:4000 -v $(pwd)/config.json:/app/config.json:ro maglev

# Or use make
make docker-run
```

**Using Docker Compose (recommended for production):**

```bash
# Start the service
docker-compose up -d

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f

# Stop the service
docker-compose down
```

### Development with Docker

For development with live reload:

```bash
# Start development environment with Air live reload
docker-compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up

# Or use make
make docker-compose-dev
```

The development setup includes:

- Live reload on code changes (via Air)
- Delve debugger port exposed on 2345
- Source code mounted for immediate updates

### Docker Make Targets

| Command                    | Description                   |
| -------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `make docker-build`        | Build the Docker image        |
| `make docker-run`          | Build and run the container   |
| `make docker-stop`         | Stop and remove the container |
| `make docker-compose-up`   | Start with Docker Compose     |
| `make docker-compose-down` | Stop Docker Compose services  |
| `make docker-compose-dev`  | Start development environment |
| `make docker-clean`        | Remove all Docker artifacts   |

### Data Persistence

The SQLite database is persisted using Docker volumes:

- **Production**: `maglev-data` volume mounted at `/app/data`
- **Development**: `maglev-dev-data` volume

To inspect the database:

```bash
docker-compose exec maglev cat /app/data/gtfs.db
```

### Health Checks

The container includes a health check that verifies the API is responding:

```bash
# Check container health status
docker inspect --format='{{.State.Health.Status}}' maglev
```

**Important:** The health checks in `Dockerfile`, `docker-compose.yml`, and `docker-compose.dev.yml` use `key=test` by default. If you change your API keys in the configuration, make sure to update the health check commands accordingly to avoid container restart loops.

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description                | Default |
| -------- | -------------------------- | ------- |
| `TZ`     | Timezone for the container | `UTC`   |

### Troubleshooting

**Container fails to start:**

```bash
# Check logs
docker-compose logs maglev

# Verify config file exists
ls -la config.json
```

**Health check failing:**

```bash
# Test the endpoint manually
curl http://localhost:4000/api/where/current-time.json?key=test
```

**Permission issues:**

```bash
# The container runs as non-root user (maglev:1000)
# Ensure mounted volumes are accessible
```
